CUT TO LIVE (ORCHESTRA TUNING) (BERNSTEIN ENTERS) (ON CUE)
(APPLAUSE)
(TO PIANO)
(PLAY C)
(PLAY B)
(PLAY 2 NOTES)
(PLAY F#)
(PLAY) (V.O.)
(CONTINUE TO PLAY WITH HARMONY)
(ORK JOINS IN)
(PLAY)
(TO ORK)
(ORK)
(PLAY)
(CHAI 6th ILL)
(ORK)
(ORK) - second time
Haffner Symphony: ready, (ORK) aim,  (ORK) fire!  (ORK)
SKIPPED
(ORK) (V.O.)
(PLAY)
WAGNER PRELUDE PROM   "TRISTAN AND ISOLDE"
(ORCHESTRA)
(APPROX 4:30)
(APPLAUSE)
SKIPPED
And it's not an unusual method of making melody, at all; I've even done it myself, in a more modest way. How many of you know the music of West Side Story? Well, what I like most about that music is how much of it grows out of a simple motive at the beginning of the score -- do you remember it?
(PLAY)
That's the gang call of The Jets --- you hear them whistling it all through the show to call each other. Well, all it is is 3 notes;
but by juggling them around,
(PLAY)
and changing their order,
all kinds of new melodies suddenly come to life.
For instance, in this order
(PLAY)
the 3 notes give us:
(PLAY AND SING MARIA).
And the same three notes, put into a jumping jazz rhythm, turn out to be a song named "Cool"
(PLAY AND SING).
And there are many other ways in which this 3-note motive was used, but I don't want to take time to plug my own music.  I just want you to see how common it is for melody to grow out of motives; everybody does it, even me.  So you see, little motives are as much a part of melody as anything else.
SKIPPED
Well, your answer to that is:  "Just  open your ears and listen."   You see, people normally expect a melody to be on top of the music, with an accompaniment underneath, like a Chopin Nocturne (PLAY)  But why does it have to be on top? The melody can be on the bottom, or in the middle as well, as in any Bach fugue; but that doesn't make it any the less melodic. It may be a little harder, to have to look for the melody, instead of having it served to you on a silver platter, but think how much greater the satisfaction is when you find it! Now here's the start of a Bach fugue -- a very short theme, but perfectly melodic. (PLAY)  Now it gets developed, as new voices join in the discussion, stating the same theme while other voices go on to other melodic statements at the same time.  (PLAY)
You see how the main subject keeps turning up in different voices -- way down in the bass, or up on top, or in the middle? While the other voices go on singing other melodies.
(PLAY)
SKIPPED
Do you remember how the theme ended just now?
(PLAY)
That's the same motive
as the one at the beginning,
(PLAY)
only it's rising
instead of descending.
(PLAY)
(ORK - BARS 73-76, CL & BN)
(ORK - BARS 72-76, VLN I, VLA, VC, CB)
(ORK - TUTTI, BARS 72-80)
(ORK - SAME: BN, LOW STR. ONLY)
(ORK - SAME, VLNS ONLY)
(ORK - SAME:  TUTTI)
(ORK - D, OMIT CLS, & STR, TO l66, DBT)
(ORK - D TO 166, CLS. ALONE)
(ORK - ii TO 166, TUTTI, EXCEPT STB.)
TELOP 24  MOZART SYMPHONY #40, IN G MINOR FIRST MOVEMENT  (ORCHESTRA)
(APPROX. 6:00)
(APPLAUSE)
24-A  COMMERCIAL  (6:00)
SKIPPED
(SING MACK THE KNIFE)
(PLAY)
(V.O.)
HINDEMITH CONCERT MUSIC FOR STRINGS AND BRASS
(ORCHESTRA)
(APPROX. 4:00)
(APPLAUSE)
(PLAY)
(PLAY WITH HARMONY)
BRAHMS SYMPHONY NO. 4 IN E MINOR FINALS
(ORCHESTRA)
(APPROX. 10.00)
(APPLAUSE)